# Hungarian keyboard layout (QWERTZ)
# Created by: The NeverGone <never@delfin.klte.hu>

include common
map 0x40e


# AltGr keys:
notsign 0x29 altgr
asciitilde 0x02 altgr
caron 0x03 altgr
asciicircum 0x04 altgr
breve 0x05 altgr
degree 0x06 altgr
ogonek 0x07 altgr
grave 0x08 altgr
abovedot 0x09 altgr
acute 0x0a altgr
doubleacute 0x0b altgr
diaeresis 0x0c altgr
cedilla 0x0d altgr
backslash 0x10 altgr
bar 0x11 altgr
EuroSign 0x12 altgr
Iacute 0x17 altgr
division 0x1a altgr
multiply 0x1b altgr
dstroke 0x1f altgr
Dstroke 0x20 altgr
bracketleft 0x21 altgr
bracketright 0x22 altgr
iacute 0x24 altgr
lstroke 0x25 altgr
Lstroke 0x26 altgr
dollar 0x27 altgr
ssharp 0x28 altgr
currency 0x2b altgr
less 0x56 altgr
greater 0x2c altgr
numbersign 0x2d altgr
ampersand 0x2e altgr
at 0x2f altgr
braceleft 0x30 altgr
braceright 0x31 altgr
semicolon 0x33 altgr
asterisk 0x35 altgr


# Shift keys:
section 0x29 shift
apostrophe 0x02 shift
quotedbl 0x03 shift
plus 0x04 shift
exclam 0x05 shift
percent 0x06 shift
slash 0x07 shift
equal 0x08 shift
parenleft 0x09 shift
parenright 0x0a shift
Odiaeresis 0x0b shift
Udiaeresis 0x0c shift
Oacute 0x0d shift
Z 0x15 shift
Odoubleacute 0x1a shift
Uacute 0x1b shift
Eacute 0x27 shift
Aacute 0x28 shift
Udoubleacute 0x2b shift
Y 0x2c shift
question 0x33 shift
colon 0x34 shift
underscore 0x35 shift
F13 0x3b shift
F14 0x3c shift
F15 0x3d shift
F16 0x3e shift
F17 0x3f shift
F18 0x40 shift
F19 0x41 shift
F20 0x42 shift
F21 0x43 shift
F22 0x44 shift
F23 0x57 shift
F24 0x58 shift


# Ctrl keys:
F25 0x3b ctrl
F26 0x3c ctrl
F27 0x3d ctrl
F28 0x3e ctrl
F29 0x3f ctrl
F30 0x40 ctrl
F31 0x41 ctrl
F32 0x42 ctrl
F33 0x43 ctrl
F34 0x44 ctrl
F35 0x57 ctrl
#NoSymbol 0x58 ctrl


0 0x29
odiaeresis 0x0b
udiaeresis 0x0c
oacute 0x0d
z 0x15
odoubleacute 0x1a
uacute 0x1b
eacute 0x27
aacute 0x28
udoubleacute 0x2b
y 0x2c
comma 0x33
period 0x34
minus 0x35
