# Dutch (Netherlands)
include common
map 0x413

exclam 0x02 shift
onesuperior 0x02 altgr
quotebl 0x03 shift
twosuperior 0x03 altgr
numbersign 0x04 shift
threesuperior 0x04 altgr
dollar 0x05 shift
onequarter 0x05 altgr
percent 0x06 shift
onehalf 0x06 altgr
ampersand 0x07 shift
threequarters 0x07 altgr
underscore 0x08 shift
sterling 0x08 altgr
parenleft 0x09 shift
braceleft 0x09 altgr
parenright 0x0a shift
braceright 0x0a altgr
apostrophe 0x0b shift
slash 0x0c
question 0x0c shift
backslash 0x0c altgr
degree 0x0d
dead_tilde 0x0d shift
dead_cedilla 0x0d altgr
EuroSign 0x12 altgr
paragraph 0x13 altgr
dead_diaeresis 0x1a
dead_circumflex 0x1a shift
asterisk 0x1b
bar 0x1b shift
ssharp 0x1f altgr
plus 0x27
plusminus 0x27 shift
dead_acute 0x28
dead_grave 0x28 shift
at 0x29
section 0x29 shift
notsign 0x29 altgr
less 0x2b
greater 0x2b shift
guillemotleft 0x2c altgr
guillemotright 0x2d altgr
copyright 0x2e altgr
mu 0x32 altgr
comma 0x33
semicolon 0x33 shift
period 0x34
colon 0x34 shift
periodcentered 0x34 altgr
hyphen 0x35
equal 0x35 shift
bracketright 0x56
bracketleft 0x56 shift
brokenbar 0x56 altgr
